INFORMATION DAILY ARTICLE 
(816 WORDS)

In yesterday’s Autumn Statement George Osborne admitted that he has failed to meet his fiscal target. The Emergency Budget of 2010 staked his Government’s reputation on fiscal prudence and debt reduction with two targets: first, to balance the cyclically-adjusted deficit within five years and, secondly, to have debt falling as a percentage of GDP by 2015-16. Yesterday the second of those was breached with the Chancellor admitting that, on current forecasts, debt will not begin to fall as a percentage of GDP until 2016-17.

The target will be missed largely because the Government’s independent forecaster, the Office of Budget Responsibility (OBR), revised its growth forecasts down for the 2012-2016 period. As a result, debt will now grow faster than the economy and the Chancellor’s target will be broken. That a change in forecasts can cause the Chancellor to breach his fiscal framework shows how brittle it was. He can claim nobody foresaw how bad the European debt crisis would be, or how long it would drag on. But a framework intended to guide long-term policy must be resilient to unexpected shocks if is to have any worth as a constraint on government spending.

A similar criticism can be levelled at the first part of the Government’s fiscal target. The OBR forecasts that he has a 70 per cent chance of achieving cyclical budget balance within five years, but the small print shows some creative accounting is required to get there. The Autumn Statement announced policy changes that will decrease Government borrowing by only £4 billion this year, but then used a number of one off measures to decrease the total deficit by over £11 billion. For example, the Treasury has moved the Bank of England’s revenues from quantitative easing onto the Government’s balance sheet. This alone cuts the deficit by an average of almost £10 billion a year over the forecast period. That money will eventually need repayment, but presently falls outside the forecast period and does not affect the Chancellor’s target. Similarly, the Chancellor has included £3.5 billion of revenues from the sale of 4G spectrum next year, despite the process having not yet begun.

Even with these accounting tweaks, the Chancellor would not have achieved his fiscal target unless the OBR had made a drastic change to the way it forecasts the depth of the recession. To see why requires understanding the Chancellor’s five-year fiscal target in slightly more detail. He is not required to balance the budget within five years, but rather the ‘cyclically adjusted’ budget. Essentially, it means he is allowed to run deficits during recessions and, the deeper the recession, the greater the deficit he can run without breaching his target.

The latest OBR forecasts reflect a greatly changed view about the depth of the recession. In March, it stated that the economy would nearly achieve its full potential by 2016 (performing only 0.4 per cent below potential). Now it estimates a drop to 2.5 per cent below its potential. That is five times deeper than expected, allowing the Chancellor to achieve his target without further cuts to spending.

The upshot is that the Chancellor will break one of his two fiscal targets and achieve the other more through good fortune than design. The risk is that a change of fortune over the next few years could dash both his fiscal targets and leave the UK with ever-rising debt. However, criticising the Chancellor for sailing close to the wind would be naïve: that is his job. The real culprit is a set of inadequate fiscal rules that fail to ensure long-term sustainability of the Government’s finances. The debt target was always going to be susceptible to changing economic conditions and its weakness is amplified by the difficult economic climate. The balanced budget target is more sensible but, as a forward looking target, does little to bind the Chancellor’s hands. Each year he rolls forward the year it will be met by one, and each year he fails to fulfil the promises of the last.

Real fiscal discipline must be for the long-term, not just for today. It must involve a framework resilient enough to cope with the unexpected shocks that the economy throws at it. It should cover all expenditure to ensure the system is not gamed by canny politicians. Finally, it needs enforcement by an independent body, free from political oversight. The experience of the past decade shows that fiscal responsibility will not naturally emerge from the capricious sparring of politicians. With the collapse of the Chancellor’s fiscal targets there is an opportunity for serious discussion about the framework that will succeed it. In a time of rising debt and low growth that chance should be seized to ensure that future Parliaments do not repeat the mistakes of the past.

James Zuccollo is Economist at the independent think tank Reform.  Its research paper Long-term fiscal sustainability is available at www.reform.co.uk
